# 2.3. Primitive Types and Values

The primitive data types supported by the Java Virtual Machine are the _numeric types_, the `boolean` type \([§2.3.4](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.4)\), and the `returnAddress` type \([§2.3.3](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.3)\).

The numeric types consist of the _integral types_ \([§2.3.1](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.1)\) and the _floating-point types_ \([§2.3.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.2)\).

The integral types are:

* `byte`, whose values are 8-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
* `short`, whose values are 16-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
* `int`, whose values are 32-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
* `long`, whose values are 64-bit signed two's-complement integers, and whose default value is zero
* `char`, whose values are 16-bit unsigned integers representing Unicode code points in the Basic Multilingual Plane, encoded with UTF-16, and whose default value is the null code point \(`'\u0000'`\)

The floating-point types are:

* `float`, whose values are elements of the float value set or, where supported, the float-extended-exponent value set, and whose default value is positive zero
* `double`, whose values are elements of the double value set or, where supported, the double-extended-exponent value set, and whose default value is positive zero

The values of the `boolean` type encode the truth values `true` and `false`, and the default value is `false`.

The First Edition of _The Java® Virtual Machine Specification_ did not consider `boolean` to be a Java Virtual Machine type. However, `boolean` values do have limited support in the Java Virtual Machine. The Second Edition of _The Java® Virtual Machine Specification_ clarified the issue by treating `boolean` as a type.

The values of the `returnAddress` type are pointers to the opcodes of Java Virtual Machine instructions. Of the primitive types, only the `returnAddress` type is not directly associated with a Java programming language type.

#### 2.3.1. Integral Types and Values

The values of the integral types of the Java Virtual Machine are:

* For `byte`, from -128 to 127 \(-27 to 27 - 1\), inclusive
* For `short`, from -32768 to 32767 \(-215 to 215 - 1\), inclusive
* For `int`, from -2147483648 to 2147483647 \(-231 to 231 - 1\), inclusive
* For `long`, from -9223372036854775808 to 9223372036854775807 \(-263 to 263 - 1\), inclusive
* For `char`, from 0 to 65535 inclusive

#### 2.3.2. Floating-Point Types, Value Sets, and Values

The floating-point types are `float` and `double`, which are conceptually associated with the 32-bit single-precision and 64-bit double-precision format IEEE 754 values and operations as specified in _IEEE Standard for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic_ \(ANSI/IEEE Std. 754-1985, New York\).

The IEEE 754 standard includes not only positive and negative sign-magnitude numbers, but also positive and negative zeros, positive and negative _infinities_, and a special Not-a-Number value \(hereafter abbreviated as "NaN"\). The NaN value is used to represent the result of certain invalid operations such as dividing zero by zero.

Every implementation of the Java Virtual Machine is required to support two standard sets of floating-point values, called the _float value set_ and the _double value set_. In addition, an implementation of the Java Virtual Machine may, at its option, support either or both of two extended-exponent floating-point value sets, called the _float-extended-exponent value set_ and the _double-extended-exponent value set_. These extended-exponent value sets may, under certain circumstances, be used instead of the standard value sets to represent the values of type `float` or `double`.

The finite nonzero values of any floating-point value set can all be expressed in the form _s_ ⋅ _m_ ⋅ 2\(_e_ − _N_ + 1\), where _s_ is +1 or −1, _m_ is a positive integer less than 2_N_, and _e_ is an integer between _Emin_ = −\(2_K_−1−2\) and _Emax_ = 2_K_−1−1, inclusive, and where _N_ and _K_ are parameters that depend on the value set. Some values can be represented in this form in more than one way; for example, supposing that a value _v_ in a value set might be represented in this form using certain values for _s_, _m_, and _e_, then if it happened that _m_ were even and _e_ were less than 2_K_-1, one could halve _m_ and increase _e_ by 1 to produce a second representation for the same value _v_. A representation in this form is called _normalized_ if _m_ ≥ 2_N_-1; otherwise the representation is said to be _denormalized_. If a value in a value set cannot be represented in such a way that _m_ ≥ 2_N_-1, then the value is said to be a _denormalized value_, because it has no normalized representation.

The constraints on the parameters _N_ and _K_ \(and on the derived parameters _Emin_ and _Emax_\) for the two required and two optional floating-point value sets are summarized in [Table 2.3.2-A](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.2-140-A).

**Table 2.3.2-A. Floating-point value set parameters**

| Parameter | float | float-extended-exponent | double | double-extended-exponent |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| _N_ | 24 | 24 | 53 | 53 |
| _K_ | 8 | ≥ 11 | 11 | ≥ 15 |
| _Emax_ | +127 | ≥ +1023 | +1023 | ≥ +16383 |
| _Emin_ | -126 | ≤ -1022 | -1022 | ≤ -16382 |

Where one or both extended-exponent value sets are supported by an implementation, then for each supported extended-exponent value set there is a specific implementation-dependent constant _K_, whose value is constrained by [Table 2.3.2-A](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.2-140-A); this value _K_ in turn dictates the values for _Emin_ and _Emax_.

Each of the four value sets includes not only the finite nonzero values that are ascribed to it above, but also the five values positive zero, negative zero, positive infinity, negative infinity, and NaN.

Note that the constraints in [Table 2.3.2-A](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.2-140-A) are designed so that every element of the float value set is necessarily also an element of the float-extended-exponent value set, the double value set, and the double-extended-exponent value set. Likewise, each element of the double value set is necessarily also an element of the double-extended-exponent value set. Each extended-exponent value set has a larger range of exponent values than the corresponding standard value set, but does not have more precision.

The elements of the float value set are exactly the values that can be represented using the single floating-point format defined in the IEEE 754 standard, except that there is only one NaN value \(IEEE 754 specifies 224-2 distinct NaN values\). The elements of the double value set are exactly the values that can be represented using the double floating-point format defined in the IEEE 754 standard, except that there is only one NaN value \(IEEE 754 specifies 253-2 distinct NaN values\). Note, however, that the elements of the float-extended-exponent and double-extended-exponent value sets defined here do _not_ correspond to the values that can be represented using IEEE 754 single extended and double extended formats, respectively. This specification does not mandate a specific representation for the values of the floating-point value sets except where floating-point values must be represented in the `class` file format \([§4.4.4](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.4.4), [§4.4.5](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.4.5)\).

The float, float-extended-exponent, double, and double-extended-exponent value sets are not types. It is always correct for an implementation of the Java Virtual Machine to use an element of the float value set to represent a value of type `float`; however, it may be permissible in certain contexts for an implementation to use an element of the float-extended-exponent value set instead. Similarly, it is always correct for an implementation to use an element of the double value set to represent a value of type `double`; however, it may be permissible in certain contexts for an implementation to use an element of the double-extended-exponent value set instead.

Except for NaNs, values of the floating-point value sets are _ordered_. When arranged from smallest to largest, they are negative infinity, negative finite values, positive and negative zero, positive finite values, and positive infinity.

Floating-point positive zero and floating-point negative zero compare as equal, but there are other operations that can distinguish them; for example, dividing `1.0` by `0.0` produces positive infinity, but dividing `1.0` by `-0.0` produces negative infinity.

NaNs are _unordered_, so numerical comparisons and tests for numerical equality have the value `false` if either or both of their operands are NaN. In particular, a test for numerical equality of a value against itself has the value `false` if and only if the value is NaN. A test for numerical inequality has the value `true` if either operand is NaN.

#### 2.3.3. The `returnAddress` Type and Values

The `returnAddress` type is used by the Java Virtual Machine's _jsr_, _ret_, and _jsr\_w_ instructions \([§_jsr_](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.jsr), [§_ret_](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.ret), [§_jsr\_w_](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.jsr_w)\). The values of the `returnAddress` type are pointers to the opcodes of Java Virtual Machine instructions. Unlike the numeric primitive types, the `returnAddress` type does not correspond to any Java programming language type and cannot be modified by the running program.

