# 1.2. The Java Virtual Machine

The Java Virtual Machine is the cornerstone of the Java platform. It is the component of the technology responsible for its hardware and operating system-independence, the small size of its compiled code, and its ability to protect users from malicious programs.

Java 虚拟机是 Java 平台的基石。它是技术的组成部分，负责其硬件和操作系统的独立性、编译代码的小尺寸以及保护用户免受恶意程序侵害的能力。‌

The Java Virtual Machine is an abstract computing machine. Like a real computing machine, it has an instruction set and manipulates various memory areas at run time. It is reasonably common to implement a programming language using a virtual machine; the best-known virtual machine may be the P-Code machine of UCSD Pascal.

Java 虚拟机是一个抽象的计算机器。像真正的计算机器一样，它有一个指令集并在运行时操纵各种内存区域。使用虚拟机实现编程语言是相当普遍的；最著名的虚拟机可能是 UCSD Pascal 语言的 P-Code 虚拟机。

The first prototype implementation of the Java Virtual Machine, done at Sun Microsystems, Inc., emulated the Java Virtual Machine instruction set in software hosted by a handheld device that resembled a contemporary Personal Digital Assistant \(PDA\). Oracle's current implementations emulate the Java Virtual Machine on mobile, desktop and server devices, but the Java Virtual Machine does not assume any particular implementation technology, host hardware, or host operating system. It is not inherently interpreted, but can just as well be implemented by compiling its instruction set to that of a silicon CPU. It may also be implemented in microcode or directly in silicon.

The Java Virtual Machine knows nothing of the Java programming language, only of a particular binary format, the `class` file format. A `class` file contains Java Virtual Machine instructions \(or _bytecodes_\) and a symbol table, as well as other ancillary information.

For the sake of security, the Java Virtual Machine imposes strong syntactic and structural constraints on the code in a `class` file. However, any language with functionality that can be expressed in terms of a valid `class` file can be hosted by the Java Virtual Machine. Attracted by a generally available, machine-independent platform, implementors of other languages can turn to the Java Virtual Machine as a delivery vehicle for their languages.

The Java Virtual Machine specified here is compatible with the Java SE 8 platform, and supports the Java programming language specified in _The Java Language Specification, Java SE 8 Edition_.  


