# 4.9. Constraints on Java Virtual Machine Code



The code for a method, instance initialization method, or class or interface initialization method \([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)\) is stored in the `code` array of the `Code` attribute of a `method_info` structure of a `class` file \([§4.7.3](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.7.3)\). This section describes the constraints associated with the contents of the `Code_attribute` structure.

#### 4.9.1. Static Constraints

The _static constraints_ on a `class` file are those defining the well-formedness of the file. These constraints have been given in the previous sections, except for static constraints on the code in the `class` file. The static constraints on the code in a `class` file specify how Java Virtual Machine instructions must be laid out in the `code` array and what the operands of individual instructions must be.

The static constraints on the instructions in the `code` array are as follows:

* Only instances of the instructions documented in [§6.5](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5) may appear in the `code` array. Instances of instructions using the reserved opcodes \([§6.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.2)\) or any opcodes not documented in this specification must not appear in the `code` array.

  If the `class` file version number is 51.0 or above, then neither the _jsr_ opcode or the _jsr\_w_ opcode may appear in the `code` array.

* The opcode of the first instruction in the `code` array begins at index `0`.
* For each instruction in the `code` array except the last, the index of the opcode of the next instruction equals the index of the opcode of the current instruction plus the length of that instruction, including all its operands.

  The _wide_ instruction is treated like any other instruction for these purposes; the opcode specifying the operation that a _wide_ instruction is to modify is treated as one of the operands of that _wide_ instruction. That opcode must never be directly reachable by the computation.

* The last byte of the last instruction in the `code` array must be the byte at index `code_length - 1`.

The static constraints on the operands of instructions in the `code` array are as follows:

* The target of each jump and branch instruction \(_jsr_, _jsr\_w_, _goto_, _goto\_w_, _ifeq_, _ifne_, _ifle_, _iflt_, _ifge_, _ifgt_, _ifnull_, _ifnonnull_, _if\_icmpeq_, _if\_icmpne_, _if\_icmple_, _if\_icmplt_, _if\_icmpge_, _if\_icmpgt_, _if\_acmpeq_, _if\_acmpne_\) must be the opcode of an instruction within this method.

  The target of a jump or branch instruction must never be the opcode used to specify the operation to be modified by a _wide_ instruction; a jump or branch target may be the _wide_ instruction itself.

* Each target, including the default, of each _tableswitch_ instruction must be the opcode of an instruction within this method.

  Each _tableswitch_ instruction must have a number of entries in its jump table that is consistent with the value of its _low_ and _high_ jump table operands, and its _low_ value must be less than or equal to its _high_ value.

  No target of a _tableswitch_ instruction may be the opcode used to specify the operation to be modified by a _wide_ instruction; a _tableswitch_ target may be a _wide_ instruction itself.

* Each target, including the default, of each _lookupswitch_ instruction must be the opcode of an instruction within this method.

  Each _lookupswitch_ instruction must have a number of _match-offset_ pairs that is consistent with the value of its _npairs_ operand. The _match-offset_ pairs must be sorted in increasing numerical order by signed match value.

  No target of a _lookupswitch_ instruction may be the opcode used to specify the operation to be modified by a _wide_ instruction; a _lookupswitch_ target may be a _wide_ instruction itself.

* The operand of each _ldc_ instruction and each _ldc\_w_ instruction must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type:
  * `CONSTANT_Integer`, `CONSTANT_Float`, or `CONSTANT_String` if the `class` file version number is less than 49.0.
  * `CONSTANT_Integer`, `CONSTANT_Float`, `CONSTANT_String`, or `CONSTANT_Class` if the `class` file version number is 49.0 or 50.0.
  * `CONSTANT_Integer`, `CONSTANT_Float`, `CONSTANT_String`, `CONSTANT_Class`, `CONSTANT_MethodType`, or `CONSTANT_MethodHandle` if the `class` file version number is 51.0 or above.
* The operands of each _ldc2\_w_ instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Long` or `CONSTANT_Double`.

  The subsequent constant pool index must also be a valid index into the constant pool, and the constant pool entry at that index must not be used.

* The operands of each _getfield_, _putfield_, _getstatic_, and _putstatic_ instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Fieldref`.
* The _indexbyte_ operands of each _invokevirtual_ instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Methodref`.
* The _indexbyte_ operands of each _invokespecial_ and _invokestatic_ instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. If the `class` file version number is less than 52.0, the constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Methodref`; if the `class` file version number is 52.0 or above, the constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Methodref` or `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref`.
* The _indexbyte_ operands of each _invokeinterface_ instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref`.

  The value of the _count_ operand of each _invokeinterface_ instruction must reflect the number of local variables necessary to store the arguments to be passed to the interface method, as implied by the descriptor of the `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info` structure referenced by the `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref` constant pool entry.

  The fourth operand byte of each _invokeinterface_ instruction must have the value zero.

* The _indexbyte_ operands of each _invokedynamic_ instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic`.

  The third and fourth operand bytes of each _invokedynamic_ instruction must have the value zero.

* Only the _invokespecial_ instruction is allowed to invoke an instance initialization method \([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)\).

  No other method whose name begins with the character '`<`' \('`\u003c`'\) may be called by the method invocation instructions. In particular, the class or interface initialization method specially named `<clinit>` is never called explicitly from Java Virtual Machine instructions, but only implicitly by the Java Virtual Machine itself.

* The operands of each _instanceof_, _checkcast_, _new_, and _anewarray_ instruction, and the _indexbyte_ operands of each _multianewarray_ instruction, must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Class`.
* No _new_ instruction may reference a constant pool entry of type `CONSTANT_Class` that represents an array type \([§4.3.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.3.2)\). The _new_ instruction cannot be used to create an array.
* No _anewarray_ instruction may be used to create an array of more than 255 dimensions.
* A _multianewarray_ instruction must be used only to create an array of a type that has at least as many dimensions as the value of its _dimensions_ operand. That is, while a _multianewarray_ instruction is not required to create all of the dimensions of the array type referenced by its _indexbyte_ operands, it must not attempt to create more dimensions than are in the array type.

  The _dimensions_ operand of each _multianewarray_ instruction must not be zero.

* The _atype_ operand of each _newarray_ instruction must take one of the values `T_BOOLEAN` \(4\), `T_CHAR` \(5\), `T_FLOAT` \(6\), `T_DOUBLE` \(7\), `T_BYTE` \(8\), `T_SHORT` \(9\), `T_INT` \(10\), or `T_LONG` \(11\).
* The _index_ operand of each _iload_, _fload_, _aload_, _istore_, _fstore_, _astore_, _iinc_, and _ret_ instruction must be a non-negative integer no greater than `max_locals - 1`.

  The implicit index of each _iload\_&lt;n&gt;_, _fload\_&lt;n&gt;_, _aload\_&lt;n&gt;_, _istore\_&lt;n&gt;_, _fstore\_&lt;n&gt;_, and _astore\_&lt;n&gt;_ instruction must be no greater than `max_locals - 1`.

* The _index_ operand of each _lload_, _dload_, _lstore_, and _dstore_ instruction must be no greater than `max_locals - 2`.

  The implicit index of each _lload\_&lt;n&gt;_, _dload\_&lt;n&gt;_, _lstore\_&lt;n&gt;_, and _dstore\_&lt;n&gt;_ instruction must be no greater than `max_locals - 2`.

* The _indexbyte_ operands of each _wide_ instruction modifying an _iload_, _fload_, _aload_, _istore_, _fstore_, _astore_, _iinc_, or _ret_ instruction must represent a non-negative integer no greater than `max_locals - 1`.

  The _indexbyte_ operands of each _wide_ instruction modifying an _lload_, _dload_, _lstore_, or _dstore_ instruction must represent a non-negative integer no greater than `max_locals - 2`.

#### 4.9.2. Structural Constraints

The structural constraints on the `code` array specify constraints on relationships between Java Virtual Machine instructions. The structural constraints are as follows:

* Each instruction must only be executed with the appropriate type and number of arguments in the operand stack and local variable array, regardless of the execution path that leads to its invocation.

  An instruction operating on values of type `int` is also permitted to operate on values of type `boolean`, `byte`, `char`, and `short`.

  As noted in [§2.3.4](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.4) and [§2.11.1](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.11.1), the Java Virtual Machine internally converts values of types `boolean`, `byte`, `short`, and `char` to type `int`.\)

* If an instruction can be executed along several different execution paths, the operand stack must have the same depth \([§2.6.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6.2)\) prior to the execution of the instruction, regardless of the path taken.
* At no point during execution can the operand stack grow to a depth greater than that implied by the `max_stack` item.
* At no point during execution can more values be popped from the operand stack than it contains.
* At no point during execution can the order of the local variable pair holding a value of type `long` or `double` be reversed or the pair split up. At no point can the local variables of such a pair be operated on individually.
* No local variable \(or local variable pair, in the case of a value of type `long` or `double`\) can be accessed before it is assigned a value.
* Each _invokespecial_ instruction must name an instance initialization method \([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)\), a method in the current class or interface, a method in a superclass of the current class, a method in a direct superinterface of the current class or interface, or a method in `Object`.

  When an instance initialization method is invoked, an uninitialized class instance must be in an appropriate position on the operand stack. An instance initialization method must never be invoked on an initialized class instance.

  If an _invokespecial_ instruction names an instance initialization method and the target reference on the operand stack is an uninitialized class instance for the current class, then _invokespecial_ must name an instance initialization method from the current class or its direct superclass.

  If an _invokespecial_ instruction names an instance initialization method and the target reference on the operand stack is a class instance created by an earlier _new_ instruction, then _invokespecial_ must name an instance initialization method from the class of that class instance.

  If an _invokespecial_ instruction names a method which is not an instance initialization method, then the type of the target reference on the operand stack must be assignment compatible with the current class \(JLS §5.2\).

* Each instance initialization method, except for the instance initialization method derived from the constructor of class `Object`, must call either another instance initialization method of `this` or an instance initialization method of its direct superclass `super` before its instance members are _accessed_.

  However, instance fields of `this` that are declared in the current class may be _assigned_ before calling any instance initialization method.

* When any instance method is invoked or when any instance variable is accessed, the class instance that contains the instance method or instance variable must already be initialized.
* If there is an uninitialized class instance in a local variable in code protected by an exception handler, then i\) if the handler is inside an `<init>` method, the handler must throw an exception or loop forever, and ii\) if the handler is not inside an `<init>` method, the uninitialized class instance must remain uninitialized.
* There must never be an uninitialized class instance on the operand stack or in a local variable when a _jsr_ or _jsr\_w_ instruction is executed.
* The type of every class instance that is the target of a method invocation instruction must be assignment compatible with the class or interface type specified in the instruction \(JLS §5.2\).
* The types of the arguments to each method invocation must be method invocation compatible with the method descriptor \(JLS §5.3, [§4.3.3](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.3.3)\).
* Each return instruction must match its method's return type:
  * If the method returns a `boolean`, `byte`, `char`, `short`, or `int`, only the _ireturn_ instruction may be used.
  * If the method returns a `float`, `long`, or `double`, only an _freturn_, _lreturn_, or _dreturn_ instruction, respectively, may be used.
  * If the method returns a `reference` type, only an _areturn_ instruction may be used, and the type of the returned value must be assignment compatible with the return descriptor of the method \(JLS §5.2, [§4.3.3](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.3.3)\).
  * All instance initialization methods, class or interface initialization methods, and methods declared to return `void` must use only the _return_ instruction.
* The type of every class instance accessed by a _getfield_ instruction or modified by a _putfield_ instruction must be assignment compatible with the class type specified in the instruction \(JLS §5.2\).
* The type of every value stored by a _putfield_ or _putstatic_ instruction must be compatible with the descriptor of the field \([§4.3.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-4.html#jvms-4.3.2)\) of the class instance or class being stored into:
  * If the descriptor type is `boolean`, `byte`, `char`, `short`, or `int`, then the value must be an `int`.
  * If the descriptor type is `float`, `long`, or `double`, then the value must be a `float`, `long`, or `double`, respectively.
  * If the descriptor type is a `reference` type, then the value must be of a type that is assignment compatible with the descriptor type \(JLS §5.2\).
* The type of every value stored into an array by an _aastore_ instruction must be a `reference` type.

  The component type of the array being stored into by the _aastore_ instruction must also be a `reference` type.

* Each _athrow_ instruction must throw only values that are instances of class `Throwable` or of subclasses of `Throwable`.

  Each class mentioned in a `catch_type` item of the `exception_table` array of the method's `Code_attribute` structure must be `Throwable` or a subclass of `Throwable`.

* If _getfield_ or _putfield_ is used to access a `protected` field declared in a superclass that is a member of a different run-time package than the current class, then the type of the class instance being accessed must be the same as or a subclass of the current class.

  If _invokevirtual_ or _invokespecial_ is used to access a `protected` method declared in a superclass that is a member of a different run-time package than the current class, then the type of the class instance being accessed must be the same as or a subclass of the current class.

* Execution never falls off the bottom of the `code` array.
* No return address \(a value of type `returnAddress`\) may be loaded from a local variable.
* The instruction following each _jsr_ or _jsr\_w_ instruction may be returned to only by a single _ret_ instruction.
* No _jsr_ or _jsr\_w_ instruction that is returned to may be used to recursively call a subroutine if that subroutine is already present in the subroutine call chain. \(Subroutines can be nested when using `try`-`finally` constructs from within a `finally` clause.\)
* Each instance of type `returnAddress` can be returned to at most once.

  If a _ret_ instruction returns to a point in the subroutine call chain above the _ret_ instruction corresponding to a given instance of type `returnAddress`, then that instance can never be used as a return address.

